Initial PTP documentation for ATIP (#542)
suse-edge/suse-edge.github.io: asciidoc/product/atip-features.adoc

In this section only telco specific profiles will be covered and, as a consequence, timestamping capability and a PTP hardware clock (PHC) in the NIC will be assumed. Nowadays all telco grade network adapters come with PTP support in hardware, but you can verify such capabilities with the following command:

[,console]
----
# ethtool -T p1p1
Time stamping parameters for p1p1:
Capabilities:
        hardware-transmit
        software-transmit
        hardware-receive
        software-receive
        software-system-clock
        hardware-raw-clock
PTP Hardware Clock: 0
Hardware Transmit Timestamp Modes:
        off
        on
Hardware Receive Filter Modes:
        none
        all
----

Replace `p1p1` with name of the interface to be used for PTP.

> The following sections will provide guidance on how to install and configure PTP on SUSE Edge specifically, but familiarity with basic PTP concepts is expected. For a brief overview of PTP and the implementation included in ATIP, refer to https://documentation.suse.com/sles/15-SP5/html/SLES-all/cha-tuning-ptp.html[].

Reviewer: We should probably refer to the latest 15-SP6 SLES docs here

Reviewer 2: You can use https://documentation.suse.com/sles/html/SLES-all/cha-tuning-ptp.html --it will always redirect to the latest version.

operatingSystem:
  time:
    timezone: America/New_York
  kernelArgs:
    - ignition.platform.id=openstack
    - net.ifnames=1
  systemd:
    disable:
      - rebootmgr
      - transactional-update.timer
      - transactional-update-cleanup.timer
      - fstrim
      - time-sync.target
    enable:
      - ptp4l
      - phc2sys
  users:
    - username: root
      encryptedPassword: ${ROOT_PASSWORD}
  packages:
    packageList:
      - jq
      - dpdk
      - dpdk-tools
      - libdpdk-23
      - pf-bb-config
      - open-iscsi
      - tuned
      - cpupower
      - linuxptp
    additionalRepos:
      - url: https://download.opensuse.org/repositories/isv:/SUSE:/Edge:/Telco/SL-Micro_6.0_images/
    sccRegistrationCode: ${SCC_REGISTRATION_CODE}
----

[NOTE]
====
The `linuxptp` package included in ATIP does not enable `ptp4l` and `phc2sys` by default. If having them enabled at provisioning time is your preference, list them in the `systemd` section, as in the above example. This can be helpful if their system specific configuration files are also deployed at provisioning time through the directed network provisioning flow (see <<ptp-capi>>).
====

> You can now follow the usual process to build the image as per the https://github.com/suse-edge/edge-image-builder/blob/release-1.0/docs/building-images.md[EIB Documentation] and use it to deploy your cluster. If you are new to EIB start from xref:../components/edge-image-builder.adoc#components-eib[] instead.

Reviewer: Again I think we should prefer the product docs where possible, we have coverage of EIB usage in the ATIP docs and also the EIB quickstart we could link to

Author: I have never noticed eib was in the quickstart section, I have linked from the components/upstream for this reason. Should we drop the last link, leave it as is or change it to the top of the quickstart guide?

Reviewer: I guess the most relevant link is the ATIP section on building the image e.g https://documentation.suse.com/suse-edge/3.1/html/edge/atip-automated-provisioning.html#id-image-creation-2 ?

Reviewer 2: Also, for internal links (pointing to some section of the Edge doc itself), please do not use http links or xrefs. Rather use the ID of the target section for linking:

If you are new to EIB start from `<<components-eib>>` instead.

or, if you want to add a custom link text:

If you are new to EIB start with the `<<components-eib,Edge Image Builder Introduction>>` instead.

Author: I'm a bit confused here, I have found some documentation stating the opposite. What is the reason for preferring one over the other?

[#ptp-telco-config]
==== Configure PTP for telco deployments

> Many telco applications require strict phase and time synchronization with very little deviance, which resulted in definition of two telco oriented profiles: the ITU-T G.8275.1 and ITU-T G.8275.2. They both have a quite high rate of sync messages, as well as other distinctive traits, such as the use of an alternative Best Master Clock Algorithm (BMCA). Such behaviour mandate specific settings in the configuration file consumed by `ptp4l`, provided in the following sections as a reference.

Reviewer: Nit - I think product docs prefer US English spellings, so `s/behaviour mandate/behavior mandates`

In this section only telco specific profiles will be covered and, as a consequence, timestamping capability and a PTP hardware clock (PHC) in the NIC will be assumed. Nowadays all telco grade network adapters come with PTP support in hardware, but you can verify such capabilities with the following command:

[,console]
----
# ethtool -T p1p1
Time stamping parameters for p1p1:
Capabilities:
        hardware-transmit
        software-transmit
        hardware-receive
        software-receive
        software-system-clock
        hardware-raw-clock
PTP Hardware Clock: 0
Hardware Transmit Timestamp Modes:
        off
        on
Hardware Receive Filter Modes:
        none
        all
----

Replace `p1p1` with name of the interface to be used for PTP.

> The following sections will provide guidance on how to install and configure PTP on SUSE Edge specifically, but familiarity with basic PTP concepts is expected. For a brief overview of PTP and the implementation included in ATIP, refer to https://documentation.suse.com/sles/15-SP6/html/SLES-all/cha-tuning-ptp.html[].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following sections will provide guidance on how to install and configure PTP on SUSE Edge specifically, but familiarity with basic PTP concepts is expected. For a brief overview of PTP and the implementation included in SUSE Edge for Telco, refer to https://documentation.suse.com/sles/15-SP6/html/SLES-all/cha-tuning-ptp.html[].
```

==== Install PTP software components

> On ATIP, the PTP implementation is provided by the `linuxptp` package, which includes two components:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In SUSE Edge for Telco, the PTP implementation is provided by the `linuxptp` package, which includes two components:
```

Below you can find a sample EIB manifest with `linuxptp`:

[,yaml]
----
apiVersion: 1.0
image:
  imageType: RAW
  arch: x86_64
  baseImage: SL-Micro.x86_64-6.0-Base-RT-GM2.raw
  outputImageName: eibimage-slmicro60rt-telco.raw
operatingSystem:
  time:
    timezone: America/New_York
  kernelArgs:
    - ignition.platform.id=openstack
    - net.ifnames=1
  systemd:
    disable:
      - rebootmgr
      - transactional-update.timer
      - transactional-update-cleanup.timer
      - fstrim
      - time-sync.target
    enable:
      - ptp4l
      - phc2sys
  users:
    - username: root
      encryptedPassword: ${ROOT_PASSWORD}
  packages:
    packageList:
      - jq
      - dpdk
      - dpdk-tools
      - libdpdk-23
      - pf-bb-config
      - open-iscsi
      - tuned
      - cpupower
      - linuxptp
    additionalRepos:
      - url: https://download.opensuse.org/repositories/isv:/SUSE:/Edge:/Telco/SL-Micro_6.0_images/
    sccRegistrationCode: ${SCC_REGISTRATION_CODE}
----

[NOTE]
====

> The `linuxptp` package included in ATIP does not enable `ptp4l` and `phc2sys` by default. If having them enabled at provisioning time is your preference, list them in the `systemd` section, as in the above example. This can be helpful if their system specific configuration files are also deployed at provisioning time through the directed network provisioning flow (see <<ptp-capi>>).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `linuxptp` package included in SUSE Edge for Telco does not enable `ptp4l` and `phc2sys` by default. If having them enabled at provisioning time is your preference, list them in the `systemd` section, as in the above example. This can be helpful if their system specific configuration files are also deployed at provisioning time through the directed network provisioning flow (see <<ptp-capi>>).
```

====

You can now follow the usual process to build the image as per the xref:../quickstart/eib.adoc#eib-how-to-build-image[EIB Documentation] and use it to deploy your cluster. If you are new to EIB start from xref:../components/edge-image-builder.adoc#components-eib[] instead.

[#ptp-telco-config]
==== Configure PTP for telco deployments

Many telco applications require strict phase and time synchronization with very little deviance, which resulted in definition of two telco oriented profiles: the ITU-T G.8275.1 and ITU-T G.8275.2. They both have a quite high rate of sync messages, as well as other distinctive traits, such as the use of an alternative Best Master Clock Algorithm (BMCA). Such behavior mandates specific settings in the configuration file consumed by `ptp4l`, provided in the following sections as a reference.

[NOTE]
====

> * Both sections only cover the case of an ordinary clock in slave configuration.

Author: Yes, it's actually "time transmitter/time receiver" now.

* Any such profile must be used in a well-planned PTP infrastructure.
* Your specific PTP network may require additional configuration tuning, make sure to review and adapt the provided examples if needed.
====

===== PTP profile ITU-T G.8275.1

The G.8275.1 profile has the following peculiarities:

> * can run directly on Ethernet and requires full network support (adjacent nodes/switches must support PTP)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Runs directly on Ethernet and requires full network support (adjacent nodes/switches must support PTP).
```

> * the default domain setting is 24

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* The default domain setting is 24.
```

> * the dataset comparison is based on the G.8275.x algorithm and its `localPriority` values after `priority2`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Dataset comparison is based on the G.8275.x algorithm and its `localPriority` values after `priority2`.
```

You can copy the following content to a file named `/etc/ptp4l-G.8275.1.conf`:

[source,]
----
# Telecom G.8275.1 example configuration
[global]
domainNumber                    24
priority2			255
dataset_comparison              G.8275.x
G.8275.portDS.localPriority     128
G.8275.defaultDS.localPriority  128
maxStepsRemoved                 255
logAnnounceInterval             -3
logSyncInterval                 -4
logMinDelayReqInterval          -4
announceReceiptTimeout		3
serverOnly                      0
ptp_dst_mac                     01:80:C2:00:00:0E
network_transport               L2
----

Once the file has been created, it must be referenced in `/etc/sysconfig/ptp4l` for the daemon to start correctly. This can be done by changing the `OPTIONS=` line to:

[source,]
----
OPTIONS="-f /etc/ptp4l-G.8275.1.conf -i $IFNAME --message_tag ptp-8275.1"
----

More precisely:

- `-f` requires the file name of the configuration file to use; `/etc/ptp4l-G.8275.1.conf` in this case

> - `-i` requires the name of the interface to use, replace `$IFNAME` with real interface name

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `-i` requires the name of the interface to use, replace `$IFNAME` with a real interface name.
```

> - `--message_tag` allows to better identify the ptp4l output in the system logs and is optional

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `--message_tag` allows to better identify the ptp4l output in the system logs and is optional.
```

> Once the above steps are complete, the `ptp4l` daemon can be (re)started:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the steps above are complete, the `ptp4l` daemon must be (re)started:
```

[,console]
----
# systemctl restart ptp4l
----

> You can now check the synchronization status by observing the logs with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Check the synchronization status by observing the logs with:
```

[,console]
----
# journalctl -e -u ptp4l
----

===== PTP profile ITU-T G.8275.2

> The G.8275.2 profile has the following peculiarities:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The G.8275.2 profile has the following specifics:
```

> * can run on IP and does not require full network support (adjacent nodes/switches may not support PTP)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Runs on IP and does not require full network support (adjacent nodes/switches may not support PTP).
```

> * the default domain setting is 44

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* The default domain setting is 44.
```

> * the dataset comparison is based on the G.8275.x algorithm and its `localPriority` values after `priority2`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Dataset comparison is based on the G.8275.x algorithm and its `localPriority` values after `priority2`.
```

> You can copy the following content to a file named `/etc/ptp4l-G.8275.2.conf`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Copy the following content to `/etc/ptp4l-G.8275.2.conf`:
```

[source,]
----
# Telecom G.8275.2 example configuration
[global]
domainNumber                    44
priority2			255
dataset_comparison              G.8275.x
G.8275.portDS.localPriority     128
G.8275.defaultDS.localPriority  128
maxStepsRemoved                 255
logAnnounceInterval             0
serverOnly                      0
hybrid_e2e                      1
inhibit_multicast_service       1
unicast_listen                  1
unicast_req_duration            60
logSyncInterval                 -5
logMinDelayReqInterval          -4
announceReceiptTimeout		2
#
# Customize the following for slave operation:
#
[unicast_master_table]
table_id                        1
logQueryInterval                2
UDPv4                           $PEER_IP_ADDRESS
[$IFNAME]
unicast_master_table            1
----

> The above configuration must be edited to include:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Make sure to replace the following placeholders:
```

> - `$PEER_IP_ADDRESS` - the IP address of the next PTP node to communicate to; that is, the master or boundary clock which will provide synchronization.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `$PEER_IP_ADDRESS` - the IP address of the next PTP node to communicate with, such as the master or boundary clock that will provide synchronization.
```

> - `$IFNAME` - it will tell `ptp4l` what interface to use for PTP

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `$IFNAME` - tells `ptp4l` what interface to use for PTP.
```

Once the file has been created, it must be referenced, along with the name of the interface to use for PTP, in `/etc/sysconfig/ptp4l` for the daemon to start correctly. This can be done by changing the `OPTIONS=` line to:

[,shell]
----
OPTIONS="-f /etc/ptp4l-G.8275.2.conf --message_tag ptp-8275.2"
----

More precisely:

> - `-f` requires the file name of the configuration file to use; `/etc/ptp4l-G.8275.2.conf` in this case

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `-f` requires the file name of the configuration file to use. In this case, it is `/etc/ptp4l-G.8275.2.conf`.
```

> - `--message_tag` allows to better identify the ptp4l output in the system logs and is optional

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `--message_tag` allows to better identify the ptp4l output in the system logs and is optional.
```

> Once the above steps are complete, the `ptp4l` daemon can be (re)started:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the steps above are complete, the `ptp4l` daemon must be (re)started:
```

[,console]
----
# systemctl restart ptp4l
----

> You can now check the synchronization status by observing the logs with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Check the synchronization status by observing the logs with:
```

[,console]
----
# journalctl -e -u ptp4l
----

===== Configuration of phc2sys

Although not required, it is recommended that you fully complete the configuration of `ptp4l` before moving to `phc2sys`.
`phc2sys` does not require a configuration file and its execution parameters can be solely controlled through the `OPTIONS=` variable present in `/etc/sysconfig/ptp4l`, in a similar fashion to `ptp4l`:

[source,]
----
OPTIONS="-s $IFNAME -w"
----

> Where `$IFNAME` is the name of the interface already set up in ptp4l that will be used as the source for the system clock. This is used, in practice, to identify the source PHC.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Where `$IFNAME` is the name of the interface already set up in ptp4l that will be used as the source for the system clock. This is used to identify the source PHC.
```

> Where `$IFNAME` is the name of the interface already set up in ptp4l that will be used as the source for the system clock. This is used, in practice, to identify the source PHC.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Where `$IFNAME` is the name of the interface already set up in ptp4l that will be used as the source for the system clock. In practice, this is used to identify the source PHC.
```

[#ptp-capi]
==== Cluster API integration

> Whenever a cluster is deployed through a management cluster and directed provisioning, both the configuration file and the two configuration variables in `/etc/sysconfig` can be deployed on the host at provisioning time. Below is shown an excerpt of a cluster definition, focusing on a modified `RKE2ControlPlane` object that will deploy the same G.8275.1 configuration file on all hosts:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Whenever a cluster is deployed through a management cluster and directed provisioning, both the configuration file and the two configuration variables in `/etc/sysconfig` can be deployed on the host at provisioning time. Below is an excerpt from a cluster definition, focusing on a modified `RKE2ControlPlane` object that deploys the same G.8275.1 configuration file on all hosts:
```

                  ## Default:        "-i eth0 -f /etc/ptp4l.conf"
                  ## ServiceRestart: ptp4l
                  #
                  # Arguments when starting ptp4l(8).
                  #
                  OPTIONS="-f /etc/ptp4l-G.8275.1.conf -i $IFNAME --message_tag ptp-8275.1"
              mode: 0644
              user:
                name: root
              group:
                name: root
            - path: /etc/sysconfig/phc2sys
              overwrite: true
              contents:
                inline: |
                  ## Path:           Network/LinuxPTP
                  ## Description:    Precision Time Protocol (PTP): phc2sys settings
                  ## Type:           string
                  ## Default:        "-s eth0 -w"
                  ## ServiceRestart: phc2sys
                  #
                  # Arguments when starting phc2sys(8).
                  #
                  OPTIONS="-s $IFNAME -w"
              mode: 0644
              user:
                name: root
              group:
                name: root
    kubelet:
      extraArgs:
        - provider-id=metal3://BAREMETALHOST_UUID
    nodeName: "localhost.localdomain"
----

> Besides other variables, the above definition must be completed with the interface name and with the other Cluster API objects, as described in xref:atip-automated-provisioning.adoc#single-node.

Reviewer 3: Is this link going to work?

Reviewer: Good catch - no it doesn't - perhaps we can just replace it with `<<atip-automated-provisioning>>` ?

Author: The filename was wrong, but it doesn't work still. I am unable to understand why the others do but this one doesn't. Will likely switch to this format.

Reviewer: @mchiappero I tested and the format I mentioned worked, it just doesn't link to the specific section - can we just go with that for now?

[NOTE]
====
* This approach is convenient only if the hardware in the cluster is uniform and the same configuration is needed on all hosts, interface name included.
* Alternative approaches are possible and will be covered in future releases.
====

> At this point your hosts should have a working and running PTP stack and will start negotiating their PTP role.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
At this point, your hosts should have a working and running PTP stack and will start negotiating their PTP role.
```
